The main purpose of computing derivatives in the gradient descent algorithm is to identify local minima.
And so in this video I'm going to explain what minima and maxima are, how we use the derivative to
find these critical points, and how to distinguish local minima from local maxima using the derivative.
Okay.
So here we have a graph of a function.
I will show you the formula for this function in a moment.
First let me identify the minima and maxima in this function that we see here.
So here we have two maxima.
And here is a minimum here.
Now there's also kind of minimum points here and here at the edges.
But we will ignore those for now.
So here we see the minimum local minimum of a function.
And here we see two local maxima of this function.
So how do we identify the local minimum and local maximum points.
Well, you know, with a simple function like this, we can just visualize it and you can point at the
graph.
However, it's not always that simple.
We're going to start working with more and more complicated functions that are just too high dimensional
to be visualizable.
So it turns out that the derivative can tell us exactly where these minima and maxima points are.
So here is the derivative.
So this green line shows the derivative of this function.
And now it turns out that all of the extreme points.
So the minima and maxima.
In the parlance of calculus these are called the critical points.
They are associated with a derivative of zero.
So where the function is maximum and where the function is minimum, the derivative has a value of zero.
So we can see that here.
Here's the function in the blue line.
The function is maximum and the derivative in the green line crosses through the zero line.
Same thing here we have a minimum.
The derivative crosses through zero.
Here we have a maximum.
The derivative crosses through zero here.
And this is basically how we identify minima and maxima.
Using calculus we start with the function.
And then we compute its derivative.
And then we set the derivative equal to zero and solve for x.
That will tell us all of the points where the derivative is zero, and the points where the derivative
is zero are the points where the function is turning around.
So it's going from positive to negative, or it's going from negative to positive.
And in that transition from positive to negative or from negative to positive, there is necessarily
going to be a local extreme point.
So a local minimum or a local maximum.
Okay.
Now this is a third order polynomial.
So therefore we're going to get three solutions.
And you see all three of those plotted here.
So x equals zero.
That's this point here.
And x equals plus or minus the square root of three over two.
Now, the exact answers don't really matter here.
The point is that we identify the minima and maxima of the function by computing the derivative.
Setting the derivative to zero, and then solving for x that gives us the minimum and the maximum.
Now these points here these are called the critical points.
They don't actually tell us which one is a minimum and which is a maximum.
These just tell us that these are the points where the derivative is zero.
So how can we distinguish between minima and maxima.
That's really important for gradient descent.
We need to know where is the minimum because we want to move towards the minimum.
You learn more about the gradient descent algorithm very soon.
But we want to identify minima and not the maxima.
Okay.
So it turns out that it's actually pretty straightforward to distinguish minimum from maximum points.
And that's really by just looking at the derivative before and after the critical point.
In particular the minima.
Okay.
So this is a repeat the.
The minima and maxima have a derivative.
This is df.
The derivative of the function equals zero.
When we look at the minimum, the minima have a negative derivative to the left and a positive derivative
to the right.
So we can see that in this example we have our derivative equals zero.
When we look to the left the derivative is negative.
And when we look to the right the derivative is positive.
So that means that this is a minimum point.
Conversely, when we look at the maxima we have the exactly the opposite situation.
So the derivative is positive to the left and negative to the right.
So here's the maximum.
Here the derivative is zero.
The derivative is positive before.
So to the left and it is negative after so to the right.
So that is how we distinguish minima from maxima.
And the gradient descent algorithm takes advantage of this fact to to distinguish minima from maxima.
Now there is another case where the derivative is going to be zero.
That actually turns out to be problematic for deep learning.
And to illustrate I will illustrate that on the next slide.
So here's a nice little animated GIF that I found on Wikipedia.
And it shows all of the or shows the three concepts that we've been discussing here.
So the derivative so this is the function.
And we can see the derivative being plotted down here.
Now we don't see the derivative explicitly drawn here as a function.
But this line here this this red.
Now it's green.
Dashed line indicates the slope of the line at each point as this like little trajectory is moving along
the function.
So this is the derivative here indicated graphically.
Here it is numerically.
So let's look at a couple of these points.
Here are minima.
Remember minima are where the derivative is zero and it's negative to the left and positive to the right.
So here it went up to the right.
You see the function is increasing after a minimum, so the derivative is positive.
Here the derivative is negative.
As we go into the minimum it's positive as we come out of the minimum.
Here is a maximum.
Now notice the derivative is going to be positive.
Going into the maximum it's going up slowly.
It's positive going into the maximum because the function is increasing and it's negative coming out
of the maximum because the function is decreasing away from this maximum.
Okay.
And then here's another example up here.
Now there's actually a third case where the derivative is zero.
And it's neither a minimum nor a maximum.
That's going to happen right here.
Notice this is going to go to zero.
Here the derivative will go to zero.
And now the function.
Here it is.
The function is not at a minimum or a maximum.
Instead the function is at a flat area.
The function is continuous or constant here.
Now this actually turns out to be a pretty significant potential issue for deep learning.
This is called vanishing gradient when you get to a situation like this.
This is called a vanishing gradient.
We are going to learn exactly why this happens and why it's a problem.
Fortunately, it's actually relatively straightforward to solve this vanishing gradient problem in deep
learning using some tricks.
But just to give you a bit of a heads up already to what this vanishing gradient means, it's where
the derivative is zero, but we're not at a minimum and we're not at a maximum.
So in this video, you learned about the main purpose of using derivatives in the gradient descent algorithm,
which you will learn about very soon.
You learned what minima and maxima are, how to use the derivative to identify minima and maxima points,
and how to distinguish a minimum from a maximum.
All of these are prerequisite knowledge for understanding how gradient descent works.